[EDU-1960] Add architecture articles to the platform section (#2623)
ably/docs: src/pages/docs/platform/architecture/horizontal-scalability.mdx

---
title: Horizontal scalability
meta_description: "Understand how Ably achieves horizontal scalability to handle large-scale realtime messaging."
---

Horizontal scalability is a strategy for enlarging capacity by adding multiple fixed-size resources rather than enlarging individual resources. This can be applied to multiple types of resources but most often applies to provision of server instances. Horizontal scalability is an alternative to vertical scalability which involves provisioning resources of ever-increasing individual capacity.

## Why horizontal scalability matters

Horizontal scalability is necessary to achieve true scalability while maintaining performance and reliability. In distributed systems like Ably, this approach is essential for meeting the demands of applications that may experience rapid growth or unpredictable traffic patterns.

> Vertical scaling has inherent limitations. There is a physical ceiling to how powerful a single machine can become, and costs increase more than linearly as you approach hardware limits. Even powerful machines still represent single points of failure, and managing failure or replacement events is generally more prone to disruption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vertical scaling has inherent limitations. There is a physical ceiling to how powerful a single machine can become, and costs increase more than linearly as you approach hardware limits. Even powerful machines still represent single points of failure, and the disruptive impact of failure or replacement events, as a fraction of overall capacity, is far higher.
```
